---
title: "GEOG60662 Dissertation Support"
collection: teaching
type: "Postgraduate course"
permalink: /teaching/GEOG60662
venue: "The University of Manchester"
date: 2025-01-01
location: "Manchester"
---

# Overview
This unit is designed to support students through the process of planning and executing their dissertation. Students will receive skills training specific to dissertation research including research methods and approaches, research design, project planning, ethics, and risk assessment.

# Aims
To introduce students to approaches to, and process of scientific/geographical research.

To guide students through the planning and design of their dissertation.

To enable production of professional reports.

To develop students' skills in searching for and analysing academic literature

#  Learning outcomes
Skills developed in research methods and project planning are highly sought by employers.

# Syllabus
An introduction to Research

Choosing a Dissertation Topic

Searching for Literature

Refining your Research Questions and Reviewing the Literature

Research Methodologies

Research Ethics and Risk

Designing and Producing an Academic Poster

Results, Discussion and Conclusions

Planning your Time and Writing up

Poster Presentation Session

# Teaching and learning methods
Interactive lectures and workshops: 18 hours

Poster presentation session: 2 hours

130 hours of private study/directed reading.

All sessions are synchronous.

The classes will be delivered via a mix of lectures, workshops and presentations. Course materials will be delivered via the VLE.

A session on searching for and critically reviewing literature will be provided by JRUL.

Students will be clearly sign-posted to my learning essentials workshops and on-line resources on dissertation research and other relevant study skills.

# Knowledge and understanding
Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of the nature of the research process, through effective planning of their dissertation research

Evaluate the strengths of different research methods and approaches

Design clear and achievable research questions

# Intellectual skills
Identify appropriate academic sources

Critically evaluate academic sources

Abstract and synthesise information

Identify an appropriate dissertation topic and justify the  significance of proposed research

Select and justify appropriate research methods for their dissertation research

# Practical skills
Use databases and search tools to find academic literature

Use IT to an advanced level to design and produce a digital academic poster

Plan a research project.

# Transferable skills and personal qualities
Communicate written ideas and information clearly and concisely

Present ideas clearly during oral presentations

Manage time and study independently

Work productively in small groups, discussing ideas with peers and providing formative feedback on the ideas of others

# Assessment methods
Other	60%

Written assignment (inc essay)	40%

# Feedback methods
Critical Annotated Bibliography - Within 15 working days via turnitin; summary cohort feedback on Critical Annotated Bibliography delivered in-class.

Dissertation Proposal Poster - Within 15 working days via turnitin; formative feedback at poster presentation session from course staff, dissertation supervisors, and other staff and PGRs.

There is no formal formative assessment task. On-going formative feedback is provided on dissertation ideas through discussions with the dissertation supervisor. Formative feedback is also provided through in-class workshops and discussions with peers and staff.

Discussions with staff and peers at the poster presentation session will be used to inform and improve the final dissertation.

# Recommended reading
Becker, L. (2014). Presenting your research: Conferences, symposiums, poster presentations and beyond. Sage.

Gatrell, J. D., Bierly, G. D., Jensen, R. R., & Thakur, R. R. (2005). Research design and proposal writing in spatial science. Heidelberg, Germany: Springer.

Gomez, B., & Jones III, J. P. (Eds.). (2010). Research methods in geography: A critical introduction (Vol. 6). John Wiley & Sons.

Montello, D., & Sutton, P. (2012). An introduction to scientific research methods in geography and environmental studies. Sage.

Parsons, T., & Knight, P. G. (2015). How to do your dissertation in geography and related disciplines. Routledge.

Thomas, R. (2019). Turn Your Literature Review Into An Argument: Little Quick Fix.
