---
title: "GEOG20351/GEOG20352 Glaciers"
collection: teaching
type: "Undergraduate course"
permalink: /teaching/GEOG20351
venue: "The University of Manchester"
date: 2024-01-01
location: "Manchester"
---
# Overview
Glacial and periglacial environments are of major importance for understanding and reconstructing modern and past climatic and environmental change. This course will examine glacial and periglacial processes in modern-day settings and show how this knowledge can be used to reconstruct past glacial and periglacial environments. Examples will be referenced from the British Isles and around the world.

# Aims
The unit aims to: 

Examine the role of glacial and periglacial processes in wider environmental change

Evaluate processes leading to the development of glacial and periglacial landforms

Explore approaches used to reconstruct past climate and environmental conditions from glacial and periglacial geomorphology 

Consider the glacial history of the British Isles and beyond (including international examples) as a means of understanding present-day landscapes and resources.

# Syllabus
Introduction

Glaciers and Climate 

Glacial erosion, transport and deposition 

Glacial geomorphological mapping 

Glacial reconstruction 

Fieldtrip 

Lowland glaciation 

Upland glaciation 

Periglaciation

Conclusions
# Teaching and learning methods
Total: 30 hours

3 : 2 Lecture : Non-lecture ratio

Lectures (18 hours)

Seminars (6 hours)

Field teaching (6 hours)

# Knowledge and understanding
Explain the significance of glacial and periglacial processes in global environmental change

Evaluate the processes leading to the development of glacial and periglacial sediments and landforms

Evaluate current understanding of the glacial history of the British Isles and elsewhere around the world

# Intellectual skills
Summarise the place of specialised glaciological knowledge within the wider context of global change

Critically evaluate debates and arguments from academic literature

Source and review examples and case studies from published work

# Practical skills
Show how a range of methodological techniques can be used to reconstruct changes in past environmental conditions from glacial and periglacial evidence

Demonstrate an ability to reconstruct glaciers from the glacial geomorphological record

Use glacial reconstruction techniques to determine changes in temperature and / or precipitation through time

# Transferable skills and personal qualities
Demonstrate an ability to compile a clear and concise report on a practical exercise

Develop written and visual presentation skills

Employ basic spreadsheet datasets and formulae to manipulate numerical data

# Assessment methods
Coursework. 2000 words. 67%

Open Book Exam-On Campus. 1.5 hours. 33%

# Formative Assessment Task	
Reconstruct a glacier and the climate conditions required to sustain that glacier	2 hours	In-person during seminar	

# Recommended reading
Introductory texts (further reading provided each week of the course):

Benn & Evans (2010) Glaciers and glaciation. Arnold: London.

Bennett & Glasser (2009) Glacial geology: ice sheets and landforms. Chichester: Wiley.
