---
title: "GEOG60951 GIS and Environmental Applications"
collection: teaching
type: "Postgraduate course"
permalink: /teaching/GEOG60951
venue: "The University of Manchester"
date: 2025-01-01
location: "Manchester"
---

# Overview
Geographical Information Science and Systems are now at the heart of much environmental research. This is true whether research is conducted from with the ‘home’ discipline of Geography or from an array of aligned areas and conducted by universities, agencies or the public sector. Increasingly considered as a distinct way of doing science, it is important to have knowledge of both GIS principles and their application to real-world problems and issues.

This unit provides a foundation in such theory and practice covering spatial concepts, representations and problem-solving skills. The material underpins the remainder of the MSc Geographical Information Science and provides a foundation for students interested in research in environmental fields, human-environment issues and processes and core physical geography applications. The general principles are also relevant for students interested in other areas of geographic enquiry involving spatial data, spatial analysis and associated analytics.

# Expectations and engagement

Students are expected to attended all lectures and complete all practical during the class or during independent study hours.

The theory and practice covered in this unit are highly relevant for developing employability skills for a range of public, private and other roles outside of the university sector. For example, spatial data analysis is core to activities in environmental agencies, local and central government, consultancies and many businesses.

Furthermore project design, data management and technical communication, including through map production is also relevant as generic transferable skills.

# Aims

To provide students with a foundation in the principles and practice of using Geographical Information Systems and Science (GIS) in environmental research.

# Intended Learning Outcomes

An understanding of key GIS and spatial analysis principles (normally including spatial interpolation, density estimation, distance functions and overlay using multi-criteria techniques).

An appreciation of the principles and methods associated with automating GIS tasks.

Knowledge of a range of environmental applications of GIS; and knowledge of GIS project design.

Skills in handling and applying technical concepts.

Skills in critical assessment and evaluation of GIS data, analysis, and results.

Enhanced skills in spatial thinking and research skills.

Extended practical skills in GIS.

Skills in importing a range of geospatial data from external repositories.

Enhanced abilities to prepare and deliver a GIS analysis project, including producing and delivering map outputs, geospatial metadata and GIS logic charts.

Experience of communicating and expressing geographical ideas and results in written and visual (map-based) form.          

Report-writing and spatial data handling and management.

Employability skills.

# Assessments

Formative Assessment Task: 

F1: Submission of work associated with the non-assessed practical. Mix of short-and longer answers with map/chart deliverables (1000 words). Verbal feedback, individual marks and written comments. Supports students in developing skills for assessment A1.

Summative Assessment Task:

A1: Submission of ONE practical write-up of Block 2. Mix of short-and longer answers with map/chart deliverables (1200 words). Verbal feedback, individual marks and written comments. 40%

A2: The design, preparation and delivery of a GIS analysis project. 1800 words report with map outputs. Individual marks and written comments (within 15 working days of submission). 60%

# Marking criteria

Assessment 1: Since this is made of the answers of ONE practical, there is no Rubric.

Assessment 2: The GIS project has the following rubric: GEOG60951 A2 Rubric.
